2025 Philosophy Subject Assessment Advice
External Assessment
Teachers can elicit more successful responses by:
ensuring that the topic chosen is within the scope of the philosophy course- ethics, epistemology, or metaphysics
helping students to create their topic question for the Issues Study – Aim to create a question that allows the student to research a range of philosophical positions (KU1,2) and the arguments for and against those positions (RA1,2). Setting a ‘question’ as the topic supports the student with generating evidence for critical analysis (CA1) and their own well-reasoned response. (RA3)
Assessment Type 3: Investigation
Students undertake one issues study. They examine a philosophical issue from any of the key philosophical areas, choosing the issue in negotiation with their teacher. 
The more successful responses commonly:
used high quality communicative skills that enabled the production of logical, clear, and well organised academic prose (C1)
having set a topic question, the student included several philosophical positions (KU1,2) and explained the arguments underpinning those positions in relation to the question. The strengths and weaknesses of those positions were analysed with depth and originality (CA1)
clearly presented and defended their own position on the question (RA3) Their opinion followed through with the essay’s thesis and was rational
had accurate, high-quality referencing which supported the well-researched essay.
The less successful responses commonly:
set a ‘topic’ rather than a specific question or issue. Having a ‘topic’ led some students to produce work in the style of an information report. This hindered the ability to generate evidence for RA 2,3 and CA1
had limited original critical analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of philosophical perspectives (CA1)
did not present and defend the student’s own position (RA3). This most likely occurred as the topic was not set as a question
presented a weak personal opinion which had little reference (or relevance) to the content of the essay (RA3)
included ideas from other academic disciplines such as psychology which limited generating evidence for the philosophy performance standards (e.g. irrelevant to KU1,2 RA1,2, CA1.)
had weaker communicative skills resulting in text that was less logical or clear and may have had errors with spelling or problematic word choices.


