Stage 2 Philosophy
Assessment Type 3: Issues Study
Is it Possible for Philosophical Zombies to Exist?
Upon the utterance of the word 'zombie', an image is usually formed in one's head of an undead reanimated corpse springing forth from a bad Holly-Wood horror film, bent on the annihilation of the human race. Less considered is the concept of a zombie itself, not scientifically but rationally. 
A philosophical zombie is a sentient being devoid of conscious awareness but showing the same characteristics as conscious awareness. They are hollow inside, reacting purely from influence and cause rather than from a conscious decision. This is not to say they are bad or that they would act remorselessly; their lack of conscious judgment should not necessarily affect their treatment of others.

Zombies have identical behaviour to conscious entities and are therefore indistinguishable from them. Philosophers consider the zombie more a conceptual possibility rather than an empirical possibility, and this concept is tested for whether a zombie could be possible rather than would one actually exist. Primarily zombies are a thought experiment designed to support arguments against physicalism and its various forms such as behaviourism, materialism and functionalism. 

I 

Imagine a scientist who has created a cloning machine. He initializes the system, walks inside, is zapped, then steps sidewards (to the left) out of the machine. In the exact same instance, his clone makes the same movement, but to the right. He has created a clone of himself, one that has identical physicality, behaviour and mind however is not entirely identical; it lacks consciousness and qualia. This clone is a philosophical zombie, a zombie duplicate of the scientist. 
The scientist wants to test not only the possibility of cloning but also the effects of it. He has made the room perfectly symmetrical. Both he and the clone walk forwards to a table situated in the centre of the room. Upon reaching the table, the clones hand collides with the scientist's glass he put down moments earlier. It falls to the ground and smashes, much to the disappointment of the clone. The clone attempts to pick up the broken glass whilst the scientist perceives this event. The scientist observes the glass falling, and feels dismayed at this unfortunate event. However, he does not blame himself. 
On the other hand, the clone has knocked the glass over himself and, influenced by this event, cleans up the broken glass. While the clone is the cause of this and would acknowledge this fact, by his nature he should not have any feelings towards this event, yet would reciprocate them nonetheless. It may seem that, if the clone does not feel emotion toward this event. The clone does not work to create the illusion he is without conscious, rather he is completely unaware of it. Without the conscious or any qualia the zombie simply will respond to the influence as would be expected of a conscious entity. 
When he sees the glass smash on the ground, the clone does not 'feel' this event. He doesn't feel any sensation when the glass hits ground, nor any true experience of this event. He is qualia free. 
Of course, when the scientist conducted this experience he would be fully aware he would be creating a clone which of course has not conscious. This has a rather predictable outcome: the clone would also believe he possessed conscious and was the original scientist and that the person across the room from him was the clone. This is the identical thought the scientist has, however only one of them can be correct.


While the scientist did clone himself, he could only clone his body and his mind. He could not clone his own conscious, and the zombie could not have qualia. So he has created a clone of himself, and this zombie possesses memories of experiences. By its nature, he is incapable of experiencing. The zombie recalls event that happened previously before the clone, but unbeknownst to the zombie, there has been a subtle shift caused by the clone where he no longer experiences even though he believes he does. 

II 

We perceive the world but can only know our own minds, not the experience of others. We observe others, and we assume they are like us; with conscious. We learn from our surroundings, we calculate, deduce, infer. We learn from ourselves, we experience, and when we do, we gain knowledge of how things affect us, and how our minds function. So when faced with other similar entities (other people), we realize we cannot experience others' lives, only our own. How do we know if they are the same as us? From learning how we work, and from observing the actions and reactions of others which match our own in the same manner we assume this is the case for others. It is something we cannot definitively be sure of but we accept others have conscious nonetheless. 

In terms of the concept of zombies, they are in a sense similar to fictional characters. When we watch a film or read a book, the characters we perceive demonstrate very similarly behaviour to own. They have complexity; personalities, emotions, experiences, all the things that define people in the real world. The difference is that they are not real; we know they are simply an invention of their creator, and they are but an illusion. We can look at this character, and be entirely sure that they do not possess true consciousness relative in our world. If we could detect zombies, they would work in a similar manner. 

III
What elements do zombies lack that conscious entities possess? 
They lack qualia. They don't 'feel what it is like' in any situation. They lack conscious experience. They are the same as Artificial Intelligence, or "AI". 
Attempting to replicate the human mind is met with much difficulty; due to our lack of understanding of the nature of conscious. If the consciousness is considered non-physical, it cannot be created, meaning replicating true intelligence would be impossible. By this definition, it is qualia and conscious that divides robots and robots from sentient beings. What we can know is how conscious works in its most fundamental sense; not of science, but of pure logic. 
As zombies do not have conscious, they must not have free will. They cannot create new ideas nor have new thoughts that originate from their minds. So, with no new input from them, they must act purely from the influence of other causes, as they cannot themselves be a cause, their existence is dictated by causation. 

One of the ways we could distinguish zombies from consciousness is if we were to consider for a moment that causes could originate from consciousness. Zombies are devoid of cause, they simply effect and are effected; part of the system of the world. Therefore, they do not have free will; if they did they would surely be able to affect what happens to them by creating causes. But they cannot do that, they are without causes, and so they will react solely from influence. 






IV 

What is conscious? The origin of the word comes from the Latin word 'con' (with) and 'scire' (to know). 
It is the 'to know' that is the primary concern with zombies; qualia. The do not 'know' what is to experience, or 'know' what anything is in any situation. When they smell something appealing they may comment on how nice it smells. They have the capability of smell, and their brain can process it. If a zombie were for example to smell smoke in a building, they would head to the nearest exit with the intent of evading the fire they have deduced. However, though they are aware of smoke, they do not 'know' what it like to experience such a sensation. 
If philosophical zombies were to exist, it would entail physicalism is false and some kind of dualism is true. The notion of zombies contradicts the concept of physicalism, which argues that everything consists of only that of which is physical. If zombies were to exist, it would mean that conscious is not dependent on physical being to exist and so one could be present without the other. If zombies were to exist, so must conceptual ghosts (entities consciousness without physical bodies). 
A rather simple argument supporting the concept of zombies is consequently structured: 
Zombies are conceivable 
Whatever is conceivable is possible 
Zombies are Possible 

An argument such as this is satisfying initially; it is logically valid. A closer examination however (in particular the nature of the premises) finds the 'conceivability' is something closer debated by many philosophers. 
A popular argument for zombies and against physicalism is that of Saul Kripke: 
Imagine God is creating the universe, and all the physical things he creates he does so to a specific set of specifications and laws such as physics. Did God need to do more to provide for consciousness? If one was to answer yes, they would support the notion that there is more to the universe than simply the physical. It would suggest there are non-physical properties without which there would only be a zombie world. 

Two major premises supporting the zombie argument are as follows: 
 P1. It cannot be ruled out on a priori grounds that there are beings who are physically and functionally identical to us but who lack phenomenal consciousness (or qualia). 
 P2. If it cannot be ruled out on a priori grounds that there are beings physically and functionally identical to us, then it is metaphysically possible that there are beings that are physically and functionally constituted the way we are but who lack phenomenal consciousness. 

Chalmers' argument supporting the concept of zombies is consequently structured: 
Physicalism states that the world consists solely of physical being (this includes consciousness). 
If physicalism is true, a conceptually logical world physical facts identical to the real world. Conscious experience must exist in this conceptual world. 
Then we can conceive a world which is indistinguishable physically though devoid of consciousness. A logical world must therefore be possible. 
Physicalism must be found to be false. 

While this argument can be found to have logical validity, philosophers nonetheless debate the truth of these premises. 
If the zombie is able to articulate an 'experience' of theirs, as some philosophers believe, this would suggest complex thought processes. If entities are capable of speak, then they must not be a zombie, for they would never have thought of the concept of language. 
Numerous arguments for the possibility of functionalism for systems have mental states either behaviourally or physically distinct from human beings. These are primarily negative arguments aiming to show the alternatives to functionalism are not acceptable. It is simple to imagine two identical entities that differ in mental states. This can also be known as a doppelganger. 
P1. If behaviourism is true, it is not possible for there to be a doppelganger who has identical behaviour but different mental states or no mental state. 
P2. It is possible for there to be a doppelganger who has identical behaviour but different mental states or no mental state. 
P3. Consequently behaviourism is false. 
The functionalist debate proposes that mental states are comprised of more than simply behaviour, but of sensory inputs and behavioural outputs. 
P1. If functionalism is true, it is not possible for someone to have a zombie twin,                                                                                                                          i.e., a doppelganger who functions just like me but has no mental states. 
P2. However, it is possible for someone to have a zombie twin. 
P3. Therefore, functionalism is not true. 
V

Are zombies possible? Yes, but this can't necessarily be proven in our own world. There is a possibility of a zombie world as their world could have an entirely different nature and different laws. 
In any case, we have not gained a true understanding of consciousness in its entirety, while we may speculate whether or not the physical can exist without the conscious, we need to gain a proper understanding of consciousness in order to definitively explain experience. 
Word Count: 1,997 Words 

References 
Kirk, R (2011), "Zombies" accessed 9 September 2012, <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/zombies/#4> 
Chalmers, D, "Self-Ascription Without Qualia: A Case-Study" accessed 10 September <http://consc.net/papers/goldman.html> 
Dennett, D (1998) "The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies" accessed 10 September <http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/unzo m b ie. htm> 
Moody, T (1994) "Conversations with Zombies" accessed 12 September <http://www.imprint.co.uk/moody.html> 
Seager, W (Unknown) "Are Zombies Logically Possible?" accessed 12 September <http://www.scar.utoronto.ca/-seager/zombie.html> 
Unknown, (Unknown) "Philosophical Zombies" accessed 13 September <http://zombies.monstrous.com/philosophical_zombies.htm> 
Carroll, R, T, (2012) "Zombies and P-Zombies" accessed 14 September <http://www.skepdic.com/zombies.html> 
Kind, A (2008) "Qualia" accessed 14 September <http://www.iep.utm.edu/qualia/> 
Genarro, R (2005) "Consciousness" accessed 13/9/2012, http://www.iep.utm .edu/consciou/ 
Weisberg, J (2012) "The Hard Problem of Consciousness" accessed 14/9/2012 <http://www.iep.utm.edu/hard-con/> 
 

Performance Standards for Stage 2 Philosophy
