Stage 2 Philosophy
Assessment Type 3: Issues Study
Could Society Operate Based Entirely on Existentialist Principles?

Existentialism is a philosophy that was predominantly promoted post World War II but is said to have been explored earlier by 19th century philosophers Friedrich Nietzsche and Soren Kierkegaard. Existentialism rejects that scientific and moral thinking is enough to understand human existence and instead the purpose of our existence is solely based on individual and personal experience. John Paul Sartre, a prominent existentialist, states that ‘man first of all exists, encounters himself, surges up in the world-and defines himself afterwards'1. Existentialism rejects that there is a defined human 'essence' that is preconceived before our existence; therefore, we are ultimately free to create our own nature or meaning. The idea that our actions define ourselves, being the guiding principle in society, could lead to a civilization with no conformity, a lack of morality, faith and rationalism. In this essay I will address the following questions: Does existence precede essence? Are we completely, radically free? What are the consequences of Existentialism for everyday Iife? By utilizing analytical and scientific methods I will examine various philosophers' arguments and come to an informed decision based on the ideology of thinkers such as Sartre, Kierkegaard, Plato, Kant and Aquinas. 
The question, could society operate based on existentialist principles, is a philosophical issue because it is concerned with the way individuals conduct themselves in society. To live based on existentialist principles is an ethical decision because it is a question of how we ought to live and behave in order to maintain a harmonious society. In addition to being an ethical issue, the philosophy of existentialism is a branch of metaphysics, the study of existence and being. Answering questions concerning existentialism also answers important questions about the mysteries of the universe. 

A significant question in metaphysics is whether God exists, and if in fact s/he doesn't exist then what are the implications? Most theists hold that God is the creator of humanity without God humanity cannot have come into existence. William Paley's analogy of; without a watchmaker (God) there would be no watch (humanity) further explains that something must have had a vision of humanity and created beings for a purpose, meaning that all humans are the product of a design, a blueprint. Theists claim that before we are born we have an essence, the essence of humanity; we possess human nature which has preceded our existence. Richard Dawkins refutes that if a complex being must be designed by a more 



1Existentialism from Dostoyevsky to Sartre, ed. Walter Kaufman, Meridian Publishing Company, 1989 


intelligent being then God must have been designed by something more intelligent than he, and so forth. Although the watchmaker argument has been disproved by computer simulation, and is a weak argument in nature, for the purpose of this essay we will assume for now that without a supreme creator there can be no pre-production essence. 

If God doesn't exist, then there cannot be a blueprint of human nature, which some philosophers such as St Augustine and Thomas Aquinas argue means that humans have no moral compass. Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative relies on humans being fundamentally rational. This must mean that humans have a pre-determined nature, created by a higher being. The problem arises; because if there is no God to create human nature then does it really exists in the first place. Existentialists support the view that without God there is no human nature; and instead we 'make up our own’. This refutes previous philosophies of Kant and Plato which claimed that essence does in fact precede existence. Whether our essence does precede our existence doesn't remotely affect humanity's daily struggle. "We find it extremely embarrassing that God does not exist, for there disappears with Him all possibility of finding values in an intelligible heaven. There can no longer be any good a priori, since there is no infinite and perfect consciousness to think it." John Paul Sartre's account of a Godless world essentially leaves humanity without values, behaving for an afterlife and no knowledge that is universal. This poses a problem for society. Existentialists like Sartre argue that we are born and then through our actions we "fashion our own essence" and as human nature is a human invention it lies at the heart of all men. Because our actions define us as human beings, we are solely responsible for them and for our own existence. Justice and virtue are our own inventions therefore any misdeed has no excuse, and grievances such as violence and cowardice are of our own responsibility and cannot be blamed on anything but your own existence. With this comes ultimate freedom, we are the masters of our own fate, all our decisions must be allowed to be made for without that freedom we cannot fashion our essence. In response to this, Christians have criticized Existentialism for the fact that it entices people to do whatever they like and are incapable of condemning ones actions or viewpoints. This criticism is the basis of existentialist morals, a morality of responsibility. "I am obliged to choose my attitude to it, and in every respect I bear the responsibility of the choice which, in committing myself, also commits the whole of humanity.”2 







2 Existentialism from Dostoyevsky to Sartre, Ed. Walter Kaufman, Meridian Publishing Company, 1989 
John Paul Sartre claims that we are radically free beings and our freedom which depends on others freedom is the foundation of our values and morality. Free will is "the doctrine that the conduct of human beings expresses personal choice and is not simply determined by physical or divine forces.” 3 lf we are free from God, from human nature, from divine consequences to our actions, we are completely and utterly individual and our values and choices are defined by our actions. 
All existentialists claim that life has no inherent meaning which leads them to believe that we may create our own meaning in life. Of course philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas, who holds that our nature drives us in the direction of goodness to achieve good ends, oppose this. The fundamental problem with his idea of free will, is the premise that we have a human nature that is programmed to do good, which, as we have already explored, is not valid. Even if this wasn't the case, his definition does not give humanity absolute freedom in their supposedly 'good intended' choices, they are out of necessity not from free will. Plato also believes that our soul has a desire to will goodness and we are guided by the higher rational part of ourselves. Yet again this theory relies on a pre-existing nature and an inherent rationalism. Existentialists criticize rationalism as it limits the freedom of a human being. We cannot be completely free if are we determined to act rationally in life, this limits the possibility of our own will to act irrationally. 
Soren Kierkegaard argues that our decisions are often beyond rational boundaries and that is why our decisions are based on our meaning to them which is often sourced from our feelings of dread and anxiety. Kierkegaard's position makes concessions for the individual, who may at any time choose to run away with an estranged lover with no money, leaving behind his family, friends and career. This decision is completely irrational, it leaves him with no future except the one of his partner and has alienated the community that he once lived in. This decision was based on the meaning the man gave it, not his rational human nature that determined his actions. 
As we have explored earlier in this essay, the lack of the existence of God destroys any hope of humans having a pre-determined essence. As a result of this, we are not born with an ethical consciousness, rational thinking or even a will to do good. As the tabula rasa theory explains, we are blank canvasses which are slowly filled through our life's actions and experiences. Does this 













3 Dictionary.com. Meanings. 

mean, "If God did not exist, everything would be permitted.”4 The grim reality of society being based on existentialist principles, at least for most theists, is that each individual would have their own values and ethics. There would be no assumed a priori knowledge and no divine consequences for actions. But one could argue that, if God's command is morally good and he commands something evil, it is morally correct. Or, if in fact, someone may act immorally and excuse themselves that their actions were of God's command. Existentialism would respond that "we remind man that there is no legislator but himself; that he himself, thus abandoned, must decide for himself' and that there is "no realms of values, any means of justification or excuse”.5
Everything would be permitted, which allows ultimate, radical freedom for human beings; the freedom to be morally responsible. Society's prejudice gates could be opened and the attacks on minority and independent thinking would cease to be. As with any principle, the existentialist idea of freedom could be abused, to justify breaking the law because it is exercising one's own freedom. Murdering someone may give meaning to someone's life and may be done to promote freedom. In such circumstances, could society punish an individual? 
To once again draw on Kant's Categorical Imperative, this action would be considered wrong, because if murdering people were a universal law, the world be unable to operate soundly. But the responsibility of the individual is to allow others the same freedom they wish to exercise; therefore, they would be required to abide by laws that maintain universal freedom. In addition, if an individual fashions their nature and existence through their actions, murdering someone would leave them undignified and amoral members of society. 
In order to reach a satisfying conclusion as to whether it would be possible to operate society based on existentialist guidelines it would first be appropriate to compare an existentialist society to one that is based on Christian or Kantian ideals. A Christian society is one based on the Ten Commandments which include loving thy neighbor, not committing adultery, worshipping God and refraining from coveting. A Kantian society revolves around duty, to do universal good and treat others as an end and never as a means. Finally, an existentialist society would be based on personal freedom, with "inventions made in the name of freedom," explaining that if your actions promote freedom, for yourself and others, then your action is morally permissible. Apart from the obvious detriments, the assumed existence of God and essence precedes existence,





4 Dostoyevsky, F. (lSBO). Brother Ivan Fyodorovich . In: Unknown The Brothers Karamazov. Russia: The Russian Messenger. Book 11. 
5Existentialism from Dostoyevsky to Sartre, ed. Walter Kaufman, Meridian Publishing Company, 1989 

the Kantian and Christian society's disallow ultimate freedom for the individual and require you to act from duty and regulations. These limit the possibility of creating true meaning for your life. An existentialist society prevents such grievances from occurring but cannot enforce strong moral guidelines which derive from universal truths. The heavy burden of responsibility falls squarely on the shoulders of citizens in an existentialist society, unlike a Kantian or Christian society where moral obligations and consequences are laid out simply. 
The fundamental problem with existentialism is that its guiding principle of ultimate freedom is contradicted by the responsibility of others freedom. In many ways this is akin to the Kantian universal duty, which clearly defines what can be considered a moral action. If at any time your freedom contradicts that of another, you must make the choice to not proceed with your action; which in itself is a free choice. Yet drawing from the societies and populations that we currently reside in, an existentialist society would not operate soundly. Although the argument that we have no essence is cogent, human nature tends to be selfish and decisions appear to be made for an agent not a commune. Perhaps this innate selfishness (which directly contravenes with responsibility for the freedom of every man) is forged by our own existence. This would mean that the individual, not human nature, is responsible for this selfishness. In conclusion, an existentialist society could not operate because currently we do not possess the selfless responsibility to cater for a healthy society. If a group of human beings, who had not experienced the current 21st century living conditions and contained no biases or imprints of the universe, then an existentialist society would be possible. This is because the only thing they know is existential freedom, not that of capitalism, communism, persecution, fear and poverty. Then their actions could solely be to create meaning in their lives and allow the same ultimate, personal freedom for each member of society. If this was the case, then a utopian society without judgment, of belief or race, would accommodate each and every individual who endeavors to create meaning in theirs and their companion's lives. 

Bibliography 
Existentialism from Dostoyevsky to Sartre, ed. Walter Kaufman, Meridian Publishing Company, 1989 Summa Theologiae I, q.82 (1945, vol.J) and Questions an Evil, q.6 (1993). The Republic, Book IV; Phaedrus, 237e-238e and 246-248; Gorgias, 466. All are found in (1997). Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1935).WiII and Ariel Durant, The Age of Louis XIV (1963). Simon and Schuster. Dawkins, Richard (2006). The God Delusion.Transworld Publishers. pp. 169-172. 

Performance Standards for Stage 2 Philosophy
