Stage 2 Philosophy
Assessment Type 3: Issues Study

Arguments for and against the traditional concept of God
In this paper I will examine arguments for and against the existence of God with information from various arguments specifically the problem of evil and Ontological Argument. The main objective for this assignment is to analyse existing arguments constructed on the issue and eventually have a more personal perspective on the issue. These arguments have been the central discussion for most Metaphysical and Epistemological philosophers including Descartes, William Palay, and Anselm which will be sited in the paper. 
When theist talks about creationism their conclusion is the universe around us has to be created by an intellectual "good" personal being perfect in power, knowledge and morality. Theist arguments set out to prove that this God exists and also to prove that he indeed possesses these attributes of perfection. One theistic argument seeks to explain not just the complex universe we live in but the existence of the perfectly organised nature we live in today, this is often referred to as the Design Argument (Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, 2009). Theists have logic when presenting their arguments of how complex the universe is. One popular example is a watch, you find it somewhere and admire its complex design for telling time but imagine the object has never been placed into reality before, you open it up and look at its inner working of the watch and its complexity, what would never "pop" into your head is that the design just happen to come together by random chance (Tom Morris, Ph.D., 1999). This is a good analogy for the complex organisation, It seems that everything is in order, the Earth, the sea, our place in time, it all seems to be in order rather than random. One theist could suggest that it had to be constructed by an intelligent being, that of God. An inductive argument for God's existence could look like this. 
1) Some features in nature are so complex and organised to a specific function. 
2) Theist's explanation is either random acts or an intelligent being. 
3) To think this is pure chance is unreasonable to theists. 
4) So the best explanation for the complex and precise way of nature is that of a superior being. 
The point is that Philosophers like William Paley have inspired Theists to show how the natural world around us contains such complex design and also each with a purpose (Stanford Philosophy, 2008). 
The Ontological Argument shows that the nonexistence of God is impossible. Ontological means the "study of being" in Greek and the idea is that when we think of the idea of God, we are thinking about the greatest conceivable being but if this being didn't exists then it wouldn't be the greatest conceivable being (Robert Arp, 2011). In other words, the philosopher Anselm said that you don't need experience to justify the existence of God but logic alone. That God existence is implied in the idea of God itself, so basically whoever said that God doesn't exist has said something logically contradictory like saying two plus two is five. "We believe that thou art a being than which nothing greater can be conceived" Anselm (Anselm Ontological Argument). Immanuel Kant Opposed this argument asserting that existence is not a predicate (Objections to the Ontological Argument, 2004) But is this argument factual? Personally it's not because it's not really an argument, it's not based on any realistic logic. 
Another argument for theists is the Cosmological Argument, basically one premise for this argument is that something caused the universe to exist and this first cause must be God meaning, for example what causes ice to form, the moisture in the air and the temperature, but what caused the temperature to drop, what caused the humidity, everything that causes something was caused by something. It could go on and on but it all has to come to a first cause (Stanford Philosophy Cosmological Argument, 2008). There must be a uncaused cause of all things because there cannot be an infinite number of causes to bring something into existence, the uncaused cause must be God (Stanford Philosophy Cosmological Argument, 2009).The world is governed by natural laws that are sustaining conscious beings, the mere fact that the universe allows beings in the first place is evident of a higher power to theists. For example if the gravity was a little bit stronger or weaker the universe would not have lasted for as long as it has now. There's so much more evidence to the conqueror that life is one in a trillion chance but let's not get into that. Everything around us is the product of a series of first causes or events that lead up to this moment, it’s unlikely and even hard to comprehend that the universe just happens to be, it's actually more plausible and logical that the universe is not just random but precisely coordinated in such complexity. An argument for this could show (Cosmological Argument, 1995-2012) 

1.) Everything which begins to exist requires a cause. 
2.) The universe began to exist. 
3.) Therefore, the universe requires a cause. 
From this, philosophers have reasoning that there must be a superior being. So basically just the idea of conceiving a perfect being is evident of a perfect being. So in conclusion a perfect being must exist. But personally as it state it says something that exist can also not exist but theirs energy, which can't not exist only be changed. 
Prudential arguments suggest that believing in God is at your best interest despite having no evidence to whether God exists. William Pascal, a philosopher who was not totally impressed with the arguments presented above to justify theism, as Pascal says (Reasons for the existence of god, 2002) "Endeavour, to convince yourself, not by increase of proofs of God!' came up with the Wager Argument that simply put Gods existence is the better bet than not believing in God. What it basically suggests is that if you believe in God you will go to heaven and if you don't you will go to hell etc but if it turns out that you don't, you have nothing to lose. 
The view to the question of whether God exists requires objective evidence, evidence that everyone involved could have access to, that anyone including you could at some point view the evidence even if only a couple of people understand it "A wise man proportions his belief to the evidence." David Hume (Stanford Philosophy David Hume, 2008). Theists claim there is a perfect being that created the world, watches over all and performs miracles. When Theism claims there's a all knowing powerful being you can't help but wonder given the nature of the world what kind of perfect being who is watching over us all the time would allow injustice such as cancer, murder etc (Tom Morris,1999). An appropriate approach to describe God is that it must be a "person" who is very knowledgeable, powerful and morally good like stated before. But if this being exists then it seems puzzling that various evil exists or more accurately pain and suffering. The problem starts that the traditional concept of God consists of "good" and "morality" but this is logically incapable with the existence of evil. 

Theists presumably have agreed that there is an amount of suffering in the world, unimaginable suffering. This would have to mean that most suffering is truly random and meaningless to the point that to all logic has to point to no traditional God can exist. A common criticism most atheist believe is that God is just wishful thinking, that people who can't deal with the reality find an alternative that is easier to cope with (Problem Of Evil, How can a good God allow evil 1996-2012). Most people who deal with loss or fell unlucky in life often turn to a popular alternate source for explanation, religion. So the problem of evil takes a purely logical form seeking to show that the existence of evil is inconsistent with the traditional attributes of God in all religions. Theist (or more specifically Christians) response to the problem of evil is answered in the Bible. When Adam and Eve disobeyed Gods command by eating a forbidden apple the consequence was suffering for everyone and everything in the world, that Adam and eve had the knowledge of good and evil which affect all humans from there on, so basically God gave us free will. Other theists respond to the problem of evil and suffering is necessary to make us better people (Philosophy-Religion Problem of Evil 2002-2012). But with the evidence of the past 20th century, personally this argument is not logical to the existence of God. 

Natural selection is a theory well documented and agreed on by atheists, it explains how objects of nature don't need any sort of designer simply it's just random. What gives this theory a strong following is the evidence and logic behind it. This can counteract with the problem of evil being simply its human nature, through evolution we have developed violent techniques to protect ourselves that lots of humans maybe through their uprising have taken this out of control (Understanding Evolution, 2009). Think about it, the bestselling video games are violent. But maybe pain and suffering is a necessity, without pain you would not be aware of the problems caused by disease, we would never be aware of the poisons that some foods contain, without emotional pain we would never appreciate certain things. The argument before suggest that pain and suffering can only mean there is no God. One Argument against Theism is simply that the universe just is and needs no explanation. David Hume and Charles Dawkins said that we have to stop somewhere and it may as well be the universe. Rather than dwell on a God that created the universe that we can't admit or really explain at some point we should admit we have no clue of the origin of the universe and never will (The universe Just is-it needs no explanation YouTube video). 

Arguments that claim that God exist and have no way to detect it is an argument is contradicting it. If a God exist then evidence of some sort is required to determine its existence. If a God is not made up of matter or energy then it's impossible for that God to exist (Strong Atheism, 2007). But if there is a God that is made up of matter and energy it has to be governed by physical laws, so basically miracles can't happen since there violations of natural laws. If God is not subject to physical laws then the concept of a God is synonymous to the concept of non-existence. 
As the arguments for theism demonstrate above, the universe is so complex and organised that therefore it is reasonable to suggest that an unimaginable force or God could be an explanation for the creation of the universe. As for the traditional concept of god, it personally cannot exist because of the laws of physics and nature. 
Word Count: 1,844 
References 
Anselm's Ontological Argument, 2008-2012, accessed 1st September 2012 
http://www.princeton.edu/-grosen/puc/phi203/0ntological.htmI Dr William Craig Videos (YouTube User), 2012, the universe just is-it needs no explanation, Viewed September 5th 2012 www.youtube.com/watch?v=OQCIYMXbb3s 
First Cause or Prime Mover, 2009, Accessed September 5th 2012, 
http://www.infidels.org/library/modern/theism/cosmological.html Internet encyclopaedia Of Philosophy Kenneth Einar Himma, 2009, Accessed 28th August 2012 http://www.iep.utm.edu/design/ 
Objections to the ontological argument, 2004, accessed 9th September 2012 
http://www.existence-of-god.com/ontological-objections.htmI Problem of Evil-Religion, 2002-2012, Accessed September 5th 2012 http://www.sevenoaksphilosophy.org/religion/problem-of-evil.html 
Problem of Evil, How can a good god allow evil 1996-2012, Accessed September 5th 2012, http://www.leaderu.com/orgs/probe/docs/evil.html Robert Arp, Jamie Carlin Watson, McGraw-Hili Professional, Philosophy demystified, 2011 N/A Reasons For The existence of God, 2012, sited at Graeme@cracklinsmarts.com Strong Atheism, 2007, accessed September 1st 2012 http://www.strike-the
root.com/71/molyneuxlmolyneux1.html 
Understanding Evolution, 2009, accessed September 9th 2012 http://evolution.berkeley.edu/evolibrary/article/evo_25 


Performance Standards for Stage 2 Philosophy
