
ASSESSMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
The assessment design criteria are based on the learning requirements and are used by:
teachers to clarify for the student what they need to learn
teachers and assessors to design opportunities for the student to provide evidence of their learning at the highest possible level of achievement.
The assessment design criteria consist of specific features that:
students should demonstrate in their learning
teachers and assessors look for as evidence that students have met the learning requirements.
For this subject the assessment design criteria are:
knowledge and understanding
reasoning and argument
critical analysis
communication.


The specific features of these criteria are described below.
The set of assessments, as a whole, must give students opportunities to demonstrate each of the specific features by the completion of study of the subject.

Knowledge and Understanding
The specific features are as follows:
KU1  Knowledge and understanding of philosophical issues and positions.
KU2 Understanding of reasons and arguments used by philosophers on issues and positions.

Reasoning and Argument
The specific features are as follows:
RA1	Explanation of the philosophical nature of issues and positions.
RA2	Explanation of the flow of logic and evidence of arguments leading to conclusions. 
RA3	Formulation and defence of philosophical positions.

Critical Analysis
The specific feature is as follows:
CA1	Critical analysis of strengths and weaknesses of philosophical assumptions, positions, and arguments.

Communication
The specific features are as follows:
C1	Communication of philosophical issues and positions, using the conventions of philosophical argument.
C2	Use of appropriate philosophical terminology, and acknowledgment of sources.


EXTERNAL ASSESSMENT
Assessment Type 3: Issues Study (30%)
Students undertake one issues study.
They examine a philosophical issue from any of the key areas, choosing the issue in negotiation with their teacher. Students consider the following questions:
Why is it a philosophical issue?
What positions do various philosophers hold?
What are the philosophers’ reasons for holding these positions?




What objections or counter examples are relevant to these positions?
What is the student’s own position, and why?
The issues study should be a maximum of 2000 words if written, a maximum of 12 minutes for an oral presentation, or the equivalent in multimodal form.
All specific features of the assessment design criteria for this subject are assessed in the issues study.


PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The performance standards describe five levels of achievement, A to E.
Each level of achievement describes the knowledge, skills, and understanding that teachers and assessors refer to in deciding how well a student has demonstrated their learning on the basis of the evidence provided.
During the teaching and learning program the teacher gives students feedback on their learning, with reference to the performance standards.
At the student’s completion of study of each school assessment type, the teacher makes a decision about the quality of the student’s learning by:
referring to the performance standards
assigning a grade between A and E for the assessment type.
The student’s school assessment and external assessment are combined for a final result, which is reported as a grade between A and E.





Performance Standards for Stage 2 Philosophy















ASSESSMENT INTEGRITY
The SACE Assuring Assessment Integrity Policy outlines the principles and processes that teachers and assessors follow to assure the integrity of student assessments. This policy is available on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au) as part of the SACE Policy Framework.
The SACE Board uses a range of quality assurance processes so that the grades awarded for student achievement, in both the school assessment and the external assessment, are applied consistently and fairly against the performance standards for a subject, and are comparable across all schools.
Information and guidelines on quality assurance in assessment at Stage 2 are available on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au).



SUPPORT MATERIALS


SUBJECT-SPECIFIC ADVICE
Online support materials are provided for each subject and updated regularly on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au). Examples of support materials are sample learning and assessment plans, annotated assessment tasks, annotated student responses, and recommended resource materials.


ADVICE ON ETHICAL STUDY AND RESEARCH
Advice for students and teachers on ethical study and research practices is available in the guidelines on the ethical conduct of research in the SACE on the SACE website (www.sace.sa.edu.au).